---
layout: page
title: About
permalink: /about/
---

The engineering of living matter grants accessibility and interaction with our natural world. The goal of synthetic biology is to make the engineering of biology easier [16306983, Endy]. Current practice of engineering biology is done largely in an ad hoc manner within complex preexisting organisms, whose cells and genomes having been convoluted from billions of years of evolution optimized for robustness, environmental adaptation, lineage persistence, and agnostic to human understanding and engineerability. The advent of genetic engineering has provided the avenue for rapid and rational design choices to be made for genome scale engineering. These have led to substantial changes in genome sequences while maintaining or extending cell function, including gene refactoring [PMC1681472, Endy;] full codon replacement [19633652, Church; ], and full genome reconstruction [20488990, Venter; 12114528, Wimmer; 26076868 Chandrasegaran]. However, all current genome design is templated using existing organisms. With exponential decrease in the cost of DNA synthesis and sequencing, fabrication of entire genomes will be ubiquitous. The bottleneck becomes the capabilities for us to design functional genomes encoding operational organisms.  

The prospect of reliably transferring and scaling human intentions into living matter necessitates the realization of a modellable, understandable cell. One strategy is to forward engineer an entire cell from scratch. Engineering a cell from the bottom up includes efforts to chemically synthesize the biomolecules important to cell function, lipid bilayer membranes, proteins, and transcription translation machinery, etc. and then mix together the constituents to spontaneously self-assemble into a synthetic cell [16924266, Forster; 20638265, Jewett; 25578717, Juhas; 21941243, Luisi; 15591347, Noireaux; 21317359, Noireaux; 21886681, Smaldon]. Groups employing this method of synthetic cell synthesis have achieved varying levels of success, but none have produced a self-replicating synthetic cell.

Another strategy for achieving an understandable cell is to reduce existing organisms into something capable of being understood. One approach has been to reduce the number of genes to find the subset of genes, or minimal genome, essential for survival [27013737, Venter; 16645050, Plattner].

Both approaches have demonstrated significant progress and have provided invaluable insight into the core functional dependencies of self-replicating living matter, but have come short of a fully engineerable cell. The bottom-up forward engineering approach entails understanding through building up, but there remains much work to be done before the capability of expressing and sustaining genomes on the scale of natural organisms is realized. Though the reverse engineering approach has succeeded in synthesizing and booting up an artificial chromosome inside of a host organism, the number of genes with undefined functions in the synthetic minimal genome seems to have increased over time. If a synthetic cell is to be readily amenable to human intention, it must be composed of a defined set of functions whose constituents are understood and predetermined.

We wish to create an organism for which all molecules are understood from a first order functional perspective, enabling rational design of genomes not limited to existing organismal instantiations. The strategy for doing so is to use a combined approach that harnesses the strengths of the existing methodologies. We utilize the genome expression capabilities in the reverse engineered approach using the existing transcription and translation machinery in cells - a container in which arbitrary genomes can be instantiated. We instead replace its natural genome with a forward engineered genome in which we understand the function and regulation of all of its genes.

Building the this synthetic cell will be a complex task requiring many complementary bodies of knowledge and we expect this willl to be a grand challenge. The current paradigm, disparate groups of scientists and engineers working in isolation, has not been successful and we take this as a testament to the difficulty of the endeavor. We suspect a collaborative effort operating within an ecosystem of research groups will promote the coordinated labor necessary to realize success. Furthermore, as biotechnology becomes increasingly dematerialized, there are ethical implications of centralized ownership of fundamentally distributed technology platforms, such as biology. To achieve the open collaborative development of a solution to a complex problem the synthetic biology community can look to the computer science community for inspiration.

When developing UNIX, Dennis Richie and Ken Thompson sought to build a system, “around which a community could form,” that would make computing, “as simple as possible.” It seems that the synthetic biology field as a whole is at a point in it’s development that necessitates a similar approach to building synthetic cells capable of self-replication. The Linux operating system, first initiated by Linus Torvalds, underpins many of the world’s computing systems and operates under an open-source philosophy. This operating system has a core kernel that allocates resources to developers applications. The idea of an operating system for cells is not new, but an open-source collaborative approach to building a biokernel, a core genome from which an infinite number of organisms can be realized, is.

The BAC Dev. Kit will make it easier for researchers to design, build and test modules for the biokernel, but it will not itself garner the necessary critical mass of participation for the project to be successful. Where others may want to prescribe strict rules and or approaches, delegating tasks and materials from a central organization, we aim to build a culture of collaboration and love for building cells. For this the synthetic biology community can look to poetry. Antoine de Saint Exupery once said, “When you want to build a ship, do not begin by gathering wood, cutting boards, and distributing work, but rather awaken within men the desire for the vast and endless sea,” we aim to awaken within people the desire to build cells.

To build a biokernel we aim to provide the community with legalware, software, hardware, and wetware tools to develop for the biokernel. These tools, in part, exist in the form of a kit, the Build-A-Cell (BAC) Developer Kit.
